# TraceBase Loading

## Introduction

### Overview

This document describes how TraceBase curators load and manage study data and assist users with submission issues.  It
does not cover installing or upgrading TraceBase.  For that, refer to `INSTALL.md`.

### Target Audience

This document is written for TraceBase curators and other users responsible for loading and validating study
submissions.

A TraceBase curator is a metabolomics domain expert whose job is to govern nomenclature consistency and scientific
correctness, such as ensuring that an HMDB_ID applied to a compound is correct or that there don't exist 2 tissue
records describing the same tissues with different names.  Ideally, a curator is command-line savvy enough to be able to
run the load commands.

## The Admin Page

The Admin page (accessed via the "Admin" link at the top-right of any TraceBase page) can only be accessed by curators.
To request access to the admin page, a superuser account must be requested from a systems administrator.

Be forewarned that this admin interface should be considered experimental.  The only functionality it currently has is
to edit the Compound table.  Editing a compound will change the autofill content of a study doc generated by the upload
submission start page, but any previously generated study docs will become stale.  So if a user adds data to an existing
study doc that contains an edited compound, it will create (fixable) conflict errors.  Future versions of TraceBase will
address this by being able to regenerate an existing study doc using the current contents of a previously loaded study
from the database.

## Data Ownership

Anyone with access to a TraceBase instance has access to all loaded data, i.e. all studies and all underlying data.
TraceBase does not support specific data protections.  In other words, all members of a lab can see, search for, and
export all data.

### Plubishing Data

TraceBase does not provide differential public versus private access to selected studies, so to "publish" any study
data, a separate public instance of TraceBase must be created.  If you don't already have a public instance of
TraceBase, please see your systems administrator to set one up, by following the instructions in `INSTALL.md`

To get the data onto a public instance, it must be loaded the same way your private instance of TraceBase is loaded, by
following this loading document.  If you've already loaded the data on your private instance, all of the potential
issues should already be worked out, so all you should need to do is locate the original files and follow the steps in
the **Quick Start** section below.

## Loading

Loading study submissions is a back-and-forth process between the curator and the submission author.  The curator's
primary responsibility is to ensure data consistency.  Most consistency issues are mitigated or are handled by things
like drop-down lists, excel formulas, and autofill, but sometimes, a submission author may not understand an unresolved
error or may not see some errors that only arise during a load, so the curator helps to resolve those issues in
consultation with the author.

### Quick Start

To load any study submission, assuming the user has fixed all issues on the Upload Submission Validate page, there is
one manual edit to the study doc that must occur before loading:

1. Edit the "Peak Annotation File" column in the "Peak Annotation Files" sheet to supply the path^ to each file relative
   to the study directory.
   ^ The study doc template creation on the Upload Submission Start page does not know the path of each submitted peak
   annotation file.  We do have plans to add that ability in future versions of TraceBase.
2. **Optional**: Validate the Study doc.  See the **Validating** section below.
<!-- TODO: Eliminate step 1: https://princeton-university.atlassian.net/browse/GREATS-251 -->
Once that is done, all you have to do to load the study doc is go to the study directory (which may contain the raw
mzXML files) and run:

    python manage.py load_study --infile study_doc.xlsx

Save the original input files if you ever need to reset the database or load the same data on another TaraceBase
instance (e.g. the public instance mentioned in the **Plubishing Data** section above).

There are some errors that can arise that are not checked by the Upload Submission Validate page.  See the
**Known Issues** section below.

### Things to Know About Building and Loading Study Submissions

#### It's OK to `control-c`

The load scripts all wrap their database operations in an atomic transaction and only commit changes at the very end.
Any exception that occurs during the script execution will prevent the final commit.

#### Ignore Warnings

Addressing issues in the warnings can suppress the warnings, but it is generally not necessary to fix warnings.
Warnings are intended specifically for the Researchers to address before submission.  They are intended to pertain to
domain knowledge issues.  For example one warning might mention potential sample contamination.  A researcher would have
to make a judgement call if unexpected isotopes are due to natural background issues.

#### mzXMLs

The first errors you are likely to encounter (even though a study doc passes validation on the site) are errors
involving mzXML files.  The validation interface on any TraceBase instance doesn't have access to those files at the
time of validation, which is why errors associated with those files only come up during loading.
<!-- textlint-disable terminology -->
The only files you need to be added to the study doc are the ones that are listed in the errors.  The mapping of mzXML
files to the samples is generally automatic, and the "mzXML File Name" column in the "Peak Annotation Details" sheet is
empty, but if any mapping could not be automatically resolved, there will be an error.

Each error you encounter should provide a suggested fix, but often, the fix is the same, and that is to add the mzXML
**with a path relative to the study directory** to the row in the "Peak Annotation Details" sheet containing the
corresponding sample and the Peak Annotation File (for the mathcing scan range), under the "mzXML File Name" column.  If
a row doesn't exist, add one.  If you cannot tell by the filenames which sample and which peak annotation file matches,
compile a list of the mzXML files (with their relative paths) and ask the researcher to put them on the correct rows.
<!-- textlint-enable terminology -->
The useful things to know about mzXMLs, to be able to address the errors, are:

- mzXML files are "raw" files that are the inputs to the abundance correction tools like AccuCor and IsoCorr.
- mzXML files contain subsets of data (positive and negative scan ranges) from the actual proprietary `.raw` files
  produced by the mass spec instrument.
- There are multiple mzXML files per sample (and per `.raw` file, defined by a polarity and scan range).
- Some mzXML files have no scan data (a side effect of how they are produced).
- Some mzXML files may have been abandonned (i.e. not analyzed) by the researcher.
- All mzXML files for 1 sample start out with the same name, but researchers sometimes append a scan label (like "_pos")
  to differentiate them.
- mzXML filenames tend to be the sample names, but sometimes the names don't match the samples exactly due to
  restrictions on sample names applied by the abundance correction software.

#### The Study Doc

The study doc is the input to every load script's `--infile` option.  It is an Excel document with multiple tabs and
each tab has its own load script.  You only ever need to run the `load_study` command however.  It runs all the
individual loaders and performs some extra holistic checks.  If users have questions about how to fill out the Study
Doc, you can point out that each header in each sheet contains a description of the data and that the
[user guide](https://princeton-lsi-researchcomputing.github.io/tracebase/) describes in detail
[How to Fill In the Study Doc](https://princeton-lsi-researchcomputing.github.io/tracebase/Upload/How%20to%20Build%20a%20Submission/2%20-%20How%20to%20Fill%20In%20the%20Study%20Doc/#).

#### Running a Load Multiple Times Will Not Duplicate Data

The loading code was written to be able to be re-run with no side-effects.  This enabled users to be able to add data to
a Study Doc that has already been loaded (i.e. add rows in each sheet of a study doc and the whole doc can be loaded
again - only the new data will be created).

#### Data Editing Is Not Directly Supported

If a user edits previously loaded data in a study doc, even if it is to fill in optional values that were previously
empty, there will be `ConflictingValueErrors`.  The only options are to either revert the changes in the Study Doc or to
apply a manual migration to the data in the database to change the associated records.  It is strongly recommended that
this be done using the Django shell (see section **The Django Shell** below).  There are checks and automations
implemented in the model code that do not exist in the database, and certain automatically maintained model fields are
protected from manual edit.

#### Any Subset of Study Doc Sheets Can Be Loaded Individually

The `python manage.py load_study` command manages the running of multiple loaders (the is separate loading code for each
individual sheet).  While there are separate commands to load each sheet, the easiest thing to do is to always just run
`load_study` and provide the Study Doc to the `--infile` option.

A Study Doc can contain any combination of the contained sheets, which are loaded in the following order:

- Study
- Compounds
- Tracers
- Infusates
- Treatments
- Animals
- Tissues
- Samples
- LC Protocols
- Sequences
- Peak Annotation Details
- Peak Annotation Files
- Peak Group Conflicts^

^ The "Peak Group Conflicts" sheet is hidden if empty and not actually loaded.  It is used to skip user-identified Peak
Groups to avoid multiple representations of any particular compound in a sample.

The order of the sheet loads is important so that the links between records can be created.  For example, and Animal
must be loaded in order for a Sample to link to it.  A failure in any one sheet will fail the entire load.  The database
is rolled back to its state before `load)study` started.  If you wish to load a subset of data, and skip a problematic
data in one sheet, this can be accomplished in one of 3 ways.  The recommended way is by supplying `--exclude-sheets` to
skip the loading of any specific sheet or sheets.  Just note the following inter-dependence:

- Infusates depends on
  - Tracers depends on
    - Compounds
- Animals depends on
  - Treatments
  - Study
- Samples depends on
  - Animals
  - Tissues
- Sequences depends on
  - LC Protocols
- Peak Annotation Files depends on
  - Peak Annotation Details depends on
    - Sequences
  - Peak Group Conflicts^

Another option is to create a separate Study Doc that only contains the desired sheets.

Lastly, the third option (which is not recommended (because it is more involved) is to run the individual `load_*`
scripts`).

^ The contents of the "Peak Group Conflicts" sheet is not actually loaded.  It specifies which Peak Groups from the peak
annotation files should and shouldn't be loaded based on user selections.  This is to ensure that each sample has only a
single representation of each compound.

### Validating

Before loading a study on the command-line, it is a good idea to try submitting the Study Doc to the Upload Submission
Validate page.  It runs the same code that the loading scripts run, with the exception that it doesn't run the lengthy
tasks (loading the Peak Annotation Files or loading the raw mzXML files).  The errors and warnings it generates are the
same ones you will see on the command-line, but in a more digestible fashion.

### Debugging a Study Load

Since the `load_study` script loads the peak annotation and raw files that the Upload Submission Validate page does not
do, there are errors that can occur on the command-line that do not occur on the Validate page, but the detail of the
errors and suggestions they make to fix them is the same.

Errors and and warnings are buffered during the load, but are output to the console with their traces as they are
encountered.  Some errors are eventually handled by the loading code and ignored.  All outstanding errors are collated
and summarized in an "`AggregatedErrorsSet` Summary" at the end of a load, which is only output if there is at least 1
fatal error.  (Take note of the *Duplicate error summaries* item in the **Known Issues** section below.)

The strategy of error handling in TraceBase is to create custom errors and warnings for common errors that are
understandable by the researchers, so that they can fix the issues in their submission before they submit the data for
loading.  Each custom error should contain advice on how to fix the problem in the data that has been identified. If you
encounter any cryptic or non-custom errors in the `AggregatedErrorsSet` Summary, please re-run your data load with the
`--debug` flag and redirect all output to a file.  Provide that file to your administrator or IT support desk for
further assistance.

For help on any particular error, consult the user guide's
[Errors and Warnings Reference](https://princeton-lsi-researchcomputing.github.io/tracebase/Upload/Errors%20and%20Warnings%20Reference/)
for further details on any particular error you see, and consult the researcher who submitted the study if any judgement
call must be made to resolve any error.

If you think you've found a bug in the TraceBase code, please use our
[feedback form](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdnYe_gvKdoELXexZ9508xO8o59F1WgXcWBNh-_oxYh9WfHPg/viewform?usp=pp_url&entry.1881422913=MAINTENANCE.md).

### Known Issues

The `load_study` script and the underlying loading code has a few issues and limitations to be aware of.  The following
is a highlight of the main things to know:

- *Performance*: Loading can be rather slow.  The main bottleneck is the "Peak Annotation Files" sheet that loads the
  curated peak data.  This will be addressed in a later version.  Depending on the size of the study, loading can take
  anywhere from 45 minutes to a few hours.  The "Peak Annotation Details" sheet load *can* also be slow if optional
  `mzXML` files are being loaded.
- *Duplicate error summaries*: Repeated errors are collected and summarized at the end of the script, however that
  summary at the end gets duplicated.  The summary to pay attention to is the last occurrence of the term
  `AggregatedErrorsSet`.  Everything below that line summarizes the important errors and warnings.  Everything above
  that line can be ignored.
- *Overly verbose*: The loading scripts currently produce a lot of console output that the TraceBase project will
  eventually pare down.  That said, there can also be extended periods of no output.  Rest assured that it is running.
- *Inflated load stats*: Some stats reported at the end of a load are inflated.
- *Adding Data to an Existing Study Doc is Labor Intensive*: If a researcher forgot to include a peak annotation file
  and started filling out the Study Doc, only later to want to add data, they must generate an entirely new Study Doc
  template from the Upload Submission Start page.  How to do this is covered in the user guide, but is mentioned here
  because users will often try to manually fill in the data and will often miss adding data to various sheets: `Peak
  Group Conflicts`, `Peak Annotation Files`, `Peak Annotation Details`, `Compounds`, etc.  The best way to vet this is
  to take the researcher's peak annotation files and quickly generate a blank study doc template (without filling in the
  sequence metadata) and then compare the row counts in the template's sheets with the researcher's study doc.  If they
  are missing data, refer them to the user guide's
  [General Tips](https://princeton-lsi-researchcomputing.github.io/tracebase/Upload/How%20to%20Build%20a%20Submission/2%20-%20How%20to%20Fill%20In%20the%20Study%20Doc/#general-tips)
  and call their attention to this item under that heading:
  - If you forgot a peak annotation file or made a mistake on the Start page, start over

## Cache and Maintained Field Maintenance

### Cache

The calculated values in TraceBase (e.g. Normalized Labeling) are computed as needed and stored in a django-controlled
Postgres cache table named `tracebase_cache_table`.  As mentioned in the *Caching and Download Performance* item in the
**Known Issues** section above, download performance can be improved by pre-computing all cached values.  This can be
done with the following command:

    python manage.py build_cached_fields

Note, depending on the size of the database, this can takes days to complete.  It will only fill in missing cached
values and not overwrite existing cached values, so inspect the script options to learn how to clear the cache.

There are cache methodologies in place to update cached values as data is loaded, but given the performance impact,
loaders currently suspect cache updates, so the best way to keep on top of pre-computing cached values is to build
caches after each load.

### Maintained Fields

Cached values are not searchable on TraceBase.  To address this, an improvement over the older caching strategy is the
creation of model fields that are automatically maintained.  Each such maintained field is automatically updated when
the data used in its computation has changed (either during a load or via ORM manipulation in the Django shell).  If any
database changes are made using any other mechanism (e.g. using the `psql` utility - which is not advised) or if
auto-updates have been disabled, maintained field values can be forcibly updated using this command:

    python manage.py rebuild_maintained_fields

It's notable that if auto-updates of maintained fields was ever disabled for a load, there is no need to run
`rebuild_maintained_fields` (unless the load adds data to an existing study).  Auto-updates, by default, occur both at
the end of a load (in a mass auto-update [for efficiency]), and in a lazy fashion as data is displayed on the TraceBase
site (or when it's downloaded).

## Database

### No Rollback

The `load_study` script uses atomic transactions, so if any error occurs, there **is** a rollback, but once a load has
successfully completed (as long as the `--dry-run` flag hasn't been supplied), there is no rollback functionality
provided.  So be sure that a Study Doc has been thoroughly validated before loading, and that each row in each sheet is
complete (NOTE: New rows can be added).  If any changes to loaded data becomes necessary, use **The Django Shell** (see
below) to ensure that the TraceBase code performs its built-in validation checks.

### The Django Shell

As mentioned above, if any previously loaded data needs to be deleted or edited, it is advisable to do it in the Django
shell to take advantage of the data checks that the TraceBase codebase does that the database does not do.  Anytime you
modify data in the database using the ORM, you should create a dunction and apply the following 2 context manager
decorators (and disable caching updates):

- `transaction.atomic()` (`from django.db import transaction`)
- `MaintainedModel.defer_autoupdates()` (`from DataRepo.models import MaintainedModel`)
  - or `MaintainedModel.no_autoupdates()`
- `disable_caching_updates()` (`from DataRepo.models.hier_cached_model import disable_caching_updates`)

This will make your record changes much faster.  For example:

    from django.db import transaction

    from DataRepo.models import *
    from DataRepo.models.hier_cached_model import disable_caching_updates

    disable_caching_updates()

    @MaintainedModel.defer_autoupdates()
    @transaction.atomic()
    def delete_bad_peak_groups():
        bad_peakgroups = PeakGrouo.objects.filter(name__icontains="bad_substring")
        for peak_group in bad_peakgroups.all():
            peak_group.delete()

    delete_bad_peak_groups()

When you execute this in the shell, you will see auto-update console output about updates to maintained fields in
affected records.  Note that doing this could also affect other cached values, so caches may need to be cleared and
built anew.
