# Development Notes

This document will serve to guide developers on implementing new code.

## Tips

Brief high-level descriptions of how TraceBase is designed to aid developers in navigating the code.

### ListViews

List views on TraceBase can be created with 2 lines of code: a class that is derived from `BSTListView` with a single class attribute (`model`) that sets to base model class for the view.  You don't even need to create templates.  You just need to update the URLs and define a link in the `base.html` template.  See the other list view classes for examples of how to customize the view.

### Loaders

There are varioius loader classes.  Each corresponds to a specific sheet in the Study Doc (see the user documentation for the file structure).

Each loader's run is coordinated by the `StudyLoader` class.  They can be run individually, but it is recommended that to run specific loaders, either produce a Study Doc with the subset of sheets you want, or use the `exclude_sheets` argument in the `StudyLoader`'s constructor.

Each loder class has a `validate` argument that is for internal use only.  It is used for the upload submission validate page, which runs the same loading code that is used to load the database, but the data is never committed to the database.

Loader classes are all derived from `TableLoader`.  To create a new loader class, consult an existing loader class and follow its layout.  The simplest example would be a class such as the `TissuesLoader`.  (Do not base anything on the `MSRunsLoader`.  This class is overdue for a refactor.)  A more complex example would be the `SamplesLoader`.

Each loader processes each input row as a single record except for the `TracersLoader` and `InfusatesLoader`.  If you need to be able to map multiple rows to a single record, look to those classes as an example.

The `PeakAnnotationFiles` loader is an example of a loader that runs other loaders (similar to the `StudyLoader`).  It runs the `PeakAnnotationsLoader` to load files generated by natural abundance correction tools like `Accucor`, `Isocorr`, and `IsoAutocorr`.

To add support another natural abundance correction tool, you must create a class derived from `PeakAnnotationsLoader`.  See the existing such classes for reference:

- `AccucorLoader`
- `IsocorrLoader`
- `IsoautocorrLoader`

They are fairly straightforward.  Their sole purpose is to convert the input data into the traceBase-specific format called `UniCorr`.

### Exceptions

TraceBase's handling of exceptions during loading uses a custom strategy whereby both errors and warnings are derived from the `Exception` class.  Exceptions are handled and buffered using an exception class named `AggregatedErrors`.

`AggregatedErrors` adds a few attributes (e.g. `is_error` and `is_fatal`).  `is_fatal` determines whether the exception will result in the raising of the `AggregatedErrors` exception at the end of the run, but its main use is to transmit warnings to the upload submission validate page so that users can see warnings on the site.

`AggregatedErrors` generates an exception summary when it is raised from any individual loader.  Another class named `AggregatedErrorsSet` is raised by the `StudyLoader` and `PeakAnnotationFilesLoader` (i.e. any loader that runs other loaders).  It generates an even briefer summary by combining common errors from multiple loaders.

### MaintainedModel

A number of the Django models in TraceBase are derived from a custom class named `MaintainedModel`.  It's purpose is to maintain the values of calculated fields in those models by using `@MaintainedModel.setter()` decorators on functions that compute values for the indicated fields.
That decorator and the `@MaintainedModel.relation()` decorator can be configured to specify when updates to those values should be updated (automatically).

Note that any maintained field must be `null=True` and that manually trying to set them will produce an exception.

Autoupdates of maintained model fields can have an effect on how efficiently manual changes to records will be.  The thing that triggers these updates is when any `MaintainedModel`'s `save` method is called (or `delete` or `add`).  If you want to manually modify records in the python shell, it is recommended that you use one of these function decorators that are context managers:

- `@MaintainedModel.defer_autoupdates()` - Peforms an efficient mass autoupdate after the decorated function exits.
- `@MaintainedModel.no_autoupdates()` - Disabled autoupdates.

Alternatively, you can use the `MaintainedModel.custom_coordinator` context manager method.  It takes a `coordinator` argument of type `MaintainedModelCoordinator`.

If you disable autoupdates using `no_autoupdates`, note that the calculated values in the database will become stale.  To update them, use `rebuild_maintained_fields` in the management commands.

### HierCachedModel

The `HierCachedModel` class is older than `MaintainedModel` and is planned to be deprecated in favor of `MaintainedModel` at some point in the future, in order to make these values searchable.

Like `MaintainedModel`, it autoupdates calculated values via an extension of the `save` method, however its autoupdates are much less efficient and can cause serious lag when loading.  The loader classes thus disable cache updates, causing them to be computed when the values are accessed on the site (lazy auto-update).

There is no cache expiry in this caching strategy (which is another reason why this strategy is planned to be deprecated).

Use the `disable_caching_updates()` function if you perform multiple record updates.  See the `build_cached_functions` utility in the management commands for pre-building caches.

Make sure that the `MAX_ENTRIES` in the settings is sufficient to hold all calculated values.  Refer to `DataRepo/models/hier_cached_model.py` for various helpful utility functions.

## How to add an advanced search output format

### Procedure

1. `DataRepo/formats/<format name>DataFormat.py`
   - Copy and rename PeakGroupsFormat.py and make the following edits
      - Set a new ID and name.
      - Set a root model
      - Determine the root queryset.  If you don't want the browse functionality to return all records of the root model (e.g. PeakData.objects.all()) (i.e. a filter is required), add a method to the class called get_root_query_set() that overrides the base class version, and returns the filtered queryset.  See FluxCircFormat.py for an example.
         - Note that if you want your pre-filter to be transparent to the user, you can alternatively override the base class's value for `static_filter`.  Any searches you set there, as the value of the `tree` member of the qry object (see the static_filter commented example), will show in the hierarchical search form, but will not be editable to the user.
      - Fill in the model_instances data: every model, it's path (from the root table to the current table), it's reverse_path (from the current table to the root table), and all its fields.
        (Note that paths (a.k.a. "key paths") use the foreign key names in the models or the "related_name" in the model being linked to.  The forward path does not include the root table and the reverse_path does not include the current table.)
         - Note that the model_instances key can be the model name, but if you need 2 instances of the the same model in the composite view (e.g. "Tracer Compound" linked from Animal and "Measured Compund" linked from PeakGroup, a different instance name must be used.  It may contain no spaces, and is what would be used to create a link for the model from `search_basic` to the advanced search.
         - Cached properties should not be searchable.
         - AutoFields (like IDs) should not be displayed (because they can change depending on how the data is loaded from scratch, thus, they should be obfuscated from the user).
         - If `displayed` is False, set a `handoff` key whose value is a unique field (e.g. `name`).  See any `id` field in the copied class's models data.
   - If not already there, add the root model to the DataRepo.models import at the top of the file.
   - Set each model's manyrelated["manytomany"] value as T/F based on whether it is in a many-to-many relationship with the root model.  Any many-to-many relationship on the key path necessitates a many-to-many status for that model instance.  Set each model's manytomany["split_rows"] value as T/F based on whether the template should display a separate row for every root-model/M:M-model combo.
      - A default annotation field (`manytomany["root_annot_fld"]`) will be created that is the lower case version of the M:M model name, but if this causes a conflict with existing root model fields, you can:
         - specify a custom annotation field name by setting `manytomany["root_annot_fld"]`.  E.g. For the MeasureCompound model instance, `manytomany["root_annot_fld"]` is explicitly set to `compound` in the PeakGroupSeachView class.
   - Add the new class to the for loop in SearchGroup.__init__

2. `DataRepo/forms.py`
   - Add an import at the top of the class created in step 1 above
   - Copy and rename AdvSearchPeakGroupsForm and:
      - Set the data member `format_class` to the class from step 1
      - Add the new the new class to the loop in the __init__ function of the AdvSearchForm class.

3. `DataRepo/templates/results/<format name>.html`
   - Copy `DataRepo/templates/results/peakgroups.html` to a new file with a name that indicates the format and edit as you wish, following these guidelines:
      - If a field's path includes a many-to-many relationship, e.g. `models.ManyToManyField`, and the resulting table should include a row for every root-model/M:M-model combo...
         - See the `manytomany` settings for step 1 above.
         - See the MeasuredCompound column code in the `peakgroups.html` for an example.  Othwerwise, follow these guidelines:
            - You should not create a nested `for` loop.  Instead, you can retrieve the M:M related record to be included on the current row of the outer loop by calling the `get_many_related_rec` template tag.  Based on the `manytomany` config, it will either return all related records as a list or it will return the one related table record (also as a list).
            - It is encouraged that you implement a `for` loop inside the `<td>` tags that can render the records either as a delimited series or as an individual value so that how the field is displayed can be toggled by the `manytomany` settings.
      - If there are no M:M relationships, the nested `for` loop in the copied template may be removed.
      - Use column headers that match the field's displayname set in step 1 so that they match the field select list.  (A reference to this value may be supplied in the future.)
      - Numeric values should use `<td class="text-end">`
      - Numeric values that have long decimal strings should be formatted with a tooltip like this: `<p title="{{ rec.longval }}">{{ rec.longval|floatformat:4 }}</p>`
      - Name fields should be linked to their details page using their ID, e.g. `<a href="{% url 'peakgroup_detail' pg.id %}">{{ pg.name }}</a>`

4. `DataRepo/templates/search/downloads/<format name>_{colheads,row}.tsv`
   - Copy `DataRepo/templates/search/downloads/peakgroups_colheads.tsv` and `DataRepo/templates/search/downloads/peakgroups_row.tsv` to new files with a name that indicates the format (e.g., same name as in step 3 with a different extension) and edit as you wish, following these guidelines:
      - If a field's path includes a many-to-many relationship, e.g. `models.ManyToManyField`, and the resulting table should include a row for every root-model/M:M-model combo...
         - See the `manytomany` settings for step 1 above.
         - See the MeasuredCompound column code in the `peakgroups.html` for an example.  Othwerwise, follow these guidelines:
            - You should not create a nested `for` loop.  Instead, you can retrieve the M:M related record to be included on the current row of the outer loop by calling the `get_many_related_rec` template tag.  Based on the `manytomany` config, it will either return all related records as a list or it will return the one related table record (also as a list).
            - It is encouraged that you implement a `for` loop inside the `<td>` tags that can render the records either as a delimited series or as an individual value so that how the field is displayed can be toggled by the `manytomany` settings.
      - If there are no M:M relationships, the nested `for` loop in the copied template may be removed.
      - Use column headers that match the field's displayname set in step 1 so that they match the field select list.  (A reference to this value may be supplied in the future.)

5. `DataRepo/templates/search/results/display.html`
   - Copy the `{% elif selfmt == "pdtemplate"...` line and the include line below it, paste it above the following `else`, and make the following edits:
      - Replace both occurrences of `pdtemplate` with the ID you assigned at the top of step 1
      - Replace the filename on the include line with the file created in step 3 above

6. `DataRepo/templates/search/downloads/download_{header,row}.tsv`
   - In both files, copy the `elif` that looks like:
     `{% elif qry.selectedtemplate == "pdtemplate" %}{% include "search/downloads/peakdata_{colheads,row}.tsv" %}`
     Paste it before the `endif` and make the following edits:
      - Replace `pdtemplate` with the ID you assigned at the top of step 1
      - Replace the filename on the include line with the file created in step 4 above

### Notes

Changing a format's content should be indicated by a version number specific to that format, added as a header to the format file.  Note that a header will be automatically added to the downloaded .tsv file that contains a timestamp, user info, and the search query.

Be careful that the .tsv file has actual tab characters and note that every newline character in the template will end up in every downloaded file, which is why the lines are so long.

## How to add/remove columns to an advanced search output format

1. `DataRepo/formats/<format name>DataFormat.py`
   - If the model exists in the models datamember
      - Copy one of the existing fields, paste, and edit.  See field editing notes below.
   - Else (if the model does not exist in the models datamember)
      - Copy one of the existing models, paste, and edit.
      - Always include the primary key as a searchable field.
      - See field editing notes below.
   - Field editing notes:
      - Note that all this class does is add the field to the fld field in the search form.  It does not affect the template.
      - "searchable" should only be False if it is a cached property.  Every visible column should otherwise be searchable.
      - Use the same display name as is used in the column header.
      - If a field is not "displayed"...
         - it will not appear to the user in the fld select list.
         - When it also *is* searchable, it means that we use this field to link to the advanced search using a primary key or otherwise obfuscated field value (like auto-generated IDs that may not persist between DB rebuilds).
         - A "handoff" field that specifies how the search form will be pre-filled out must be added.  The handoff field must be unique (or uniquely correspond to the field that is used in the link).

2. `DataRepo/templates/results/<format name>.html`
   - Each template is different, but generally, unless the model doesn't already exist in the template, just add a column to the HTML table.
   - If a model doesn't already exist in the template and is related to the root model, a nested loop must be added.  All current models have at least 1 such model (e.g. Study).  Follow its example.
   - General guidelines:
      - Number fields should be right-aligned
      - Name fields should be linked to the model's detail page
      - Long decimal values should be shortened/truncated
      - None values should be ensured to display as "None" so they can be differentiated from empty string
      - Manipulated values (like truncated decimal values) should have a tooltip that shows the full value
      - Headers should show units in parenthases if a value has units

3. `DataRepo/templates/downloads/<format name>_{colheads,row}.tsv`
   - Each template is different, but generally, unless the model doesn't already exist in the template, just add a column to the tab-delimited headers and row files.
   - General guidelines:
      - Field values should not be manipulated/modified (e.g. do not truncate decimal places) except to match the format supplied by researchers in the loading files (when the stored version in the database differs, e.g. Sample.time_collected or Animal.age, which are saved as time-deltas)
      - None values should be ensured to display as "None" so they can be differentiated from empty string
      - Headers should show units in parentheses if a value has units
